All right, folks. Welcome back. We are in the VIP room of
the Emotional Freedom Challenge, and every day we're going to
get together. After the main session, we're gonna talk about what we've
learned, answer your questions. This is where we get to
have live Q&A, and as
promised, I am inviting
guests to come, and the first one on the
chopping block here is Coach Blu
Robinson. Blue is the founder and head
coach for Addict to Athlete.
You guys, this is the only addiction
recovery program that I have ever endorsed,
become a sponsor of. I run with you
guys.
Mm-hmm.
I got the T-shirt.
Yep.
Um, Blue, thank you for joining me as our special guest here behind
the scenes in our Q&A, VIP session.
Mm.
Um, I would love to just know
from, from your experience in day one, and you've known this for a
while. You're a certified positivity practitioner.
Um, we've been working together for
how long now?
Many years.
A-
Many years
... a few decades, I think.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
But you've done some amazing work using models of positive
psychology in your work. But I, I'm, I'm just
curious, what, what's one of your main takeaways from today's session?
What's sticking and clicking for you, Blue?
I love it, Dr. Paul, when we do... You're teaching what you've always
modeled, and that's to live on purpose.
To do these challenges is simply to put yourself in a position
where you can see all the greatness, you can see all the miracles, and you can
slow down and see how you fit into them all, to, to literally live your life
on purpose. Instead of feeling like you're a tumbleweed being blown around in the
wind and going where it wants you to, you get to kind of get, like you said, back
into the driver's seat. I think that's a, that's a big thing these days.
With everything going on in our world, sometimes it feels super out of control.
All we have to do is maybe shift down and, and pay attention to what we're
doing, and that makes the, the future just a little bit more bright and a
little bit more able to, to pinpoint, well, where we wanna
head. So I, I think everything you're speaking about today just resonates deep with
me.
Well, as you're talking about where we're going, you know, but what's
coming? We don't know.
Mm. Yep. Nope. Don't know.
Tomorrow we're diving into that creation part of the model,
and I know that's one of your favorite parts because-
Mm-hmm
... you're a powerful creator.
Absolutely.
What do-
Absolutely
... Blue, I'm, I'm curious. What...
I, I'm boldly promising
that people can achieve hope,
confidence, and peace.
Mm-hmm.
You've been working in an industry where all three of those
things are sorely lacking.
Right.
And this is taking lives. It's... We're losing way too many
people, I think.
Mm-hmm.
Um, can you comment a little bit about
what, what is it that, that seems to
actually bring those outcomes to the people that you're working
with?
Right. Right. You know, it's interesting.
Like I say this a lot, there's a lot of metaphor-type experiences to be
had in, connecting recreation and athletics
into life itself, into re- those recovery, mental
health, all kinds of stuff. I've discovered that movement, physical movement equals
healing, and what I've noticed is that there's a, it's a profound statement that
you hear at the beginning of every race.
I mean, back when Adam was, was running all-star track and, and
field there at, Orem High School, right? I loved, I loved watching him.
And every time before a race you'd hear them say, "Athletes, take your
mark," and that means you are being called out to,
to go take your mark, right? To take your place, if you
will. And so that's like a cue for us in life to kind of say, "All right.
It's time for me to step up." And they say then, "Get set," and
there's so much that happens in the get set, you know?
This all happens in the blink of an eye usually, but if you slow it down, amazing
things happen. You've taken your place. It's designated for you.
Now you're getting set, which means you're hushing out all the crowd who's cheering
and some of the people that are booing, and you're focusing down where you're
headed. You don't know what's coming up because there's 1,000,001 things that could
go wrong, but you're focused on what's going right at this moment and
this moment only. You're getting set,
and when that
indication of go happens by the firing of a gun or a
push, you know, a run-
Yeah
... you are now moving forward. And like my favorite cartoon
growing, you know, with the kids, Meet the Robinsons for obvious purposes.
You gotta keep moving forward.
That was it.
Absolutely. You gotta keep moving forward, and that's kind of what I think about,
you know, the premise that you're teaching here. Take your mark. Know who you are.
Take your place. Get set. Focus on what it is that you're trying to accomplish,
and then when it's time to go, you don't look backwards.
I don't see anyone just, you know, stand up, dust themselves off, look behind them,
and then start running. They just go. And so I think, Dr.
Paul, that's the beauty about what you're teaching here, too, is that we're in
control of this. We get to choose what we want to experience.
When we take our place, we focus, and we go, amazing things can
happen. It's better than just sitting around waiting for something to happen, I
think.
Mm.
I love that. You know, we were talking about
attitude, and I think waiting for something to
happen,
waiting for the troops to come, right?
Mm-hmm.
That's a position. I didn't... And when I
shared some of that origin story with you, you know, where, where that came from,
and you knew me during those times.
Oh, yeah.
I was, I was in a position
where I didn't realize I was taking a
position. I didn't realize I was choosing that.
Right.
And choice precedes, or, or
excuse me, awareness precedes choice,
right? You-
Absolutely
... it's not, it's seen as a choice. It's not.
And I'm sure you've seen this in your work because a lot of folks who are
stuck in an addiction, for example,
they don't really see where their choice exists,
and I think addiction often steals that from us.
Mm-hmm.
At least the awareness of the choice.
And
I don't know if you've got an additional comment about that.
I was just, just kind of, going off with what you had just
shared.
Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. I think when we think the choice is taken away
from us, I think that's the most silly thing that we can probably believe is
because even though people look at addiction and addiction issues as
being like, you know, being hijacked, if you will, by a substance or a
chemical or a behavior-
Yeah
... that's not the case either. We get to choose. And there...
The thing that's interesting I've found, Dr.
Paul, is that it's the stuff we go through, the heavy stuff that we've chosen,
they're necessary steps for whatever comes next.
We have to take those steps to either learn from them
or to get deeper into it. And so I think when we truly
take a step out and realize that, our best thinking put us in those
situations at the time, if we can then, af- after the race
is done and you're at, at the finish line, turn around and see how far you've
come, that's the time I think where we can see all the choices that we made
in consecutive order, whether they were good or bad, has put us right
here. I love your analogy about, like, the horizon, how as much
as you wanna run to the horizon, it always changes.
I'd ran the squa- I ran the Pony Express 50 Miler out in the West
Desert of Utah, and I remember there was a spot where I was, like, on
the flattest of flat pancake place I've ever seen in my life, and it looked like I
was never gonna reach this destination.
And I remember the principle you taught me about I chose to get here.
I chose to put myself here, but right now I felt like I'm in the middle of this
stupid thing, and I can't see the f- I can't see how far I'm going.
My, my watch had died. I didn't charge it, so I had no idea how far I was,
didn't know how far I had to go. Some guy stops me and, you know, asked me what I'm
doing, and I'm like, "Well, a bunch of us are running a race, and I'm going to this
spot." He's like, "Yeah, you're almost there." That almost there was another, like,
28 miles. So, you know, that was kind of a kick in the gut.
But I remember what you said. The horizon as I was running to it, it seemed
to always move when I got there.
Yeah.
But when I got to that point, I could turn around, see how far I've come and all
the choices that put me there. And so that theory of the gap being the middle was a
choice that I made to, to, to experience what I
did, and I'm so glad for that experience. The choices that we make, Dr.
Paul, good or bad, I think they're all necessary steps for what comes
next.
Ah. So true. Okay, got one
more question for you, and then we're gonna go into the Q&A
session-
Sounds good
... officially, and I'll let you, sit more comfortably in, in
your other seat. But, um-
Pleasure
... the other question I had for you has to do with the challenge task
for today. And for the most part is that gratitude
power up. I know you've experienced that before.
Give me your take on the challenge task and the power that that might
bring to anybody involved in the challenge.
What's your take?
I think it's a great challenge. I've done this with you before.
I did it when you, you had us do the hundred, and it is difficult, but it's
possible because what I think it does is it opens up your focus and your
perception on how much, how much is really around us.
You know, the simple things will be the easy things to, to knock off the list,
right? But when you start getting into, you know, what's behind the simple things
and what's behind, behind the simpler things, to really be appreciative of, to be
mindful of it, I think that's when you can start training your brain to literally
see the good even in the bad. And that's not easy to
do, you know? To, to literally... And I heard this comment years
ago, and it's always, it's always hurt my stomach when I've, when I've said it out
loud, but to learn how to truly enjoy your suffering is
insanity. But when you can be appreciative for it, that it's, that
it is a, you know, but a small period, that it is just a time of, of,
maybe reflection and maybe, you know, choice changing, those things can be put
on those lists too, that we have the ability.
So I think there's so many angles to this, and I'm really appreciative that you're
having us do this this week simply because it's gonna broaden our horizons.
It's gonna broaden our perspective, and it's gonna bring a lot more awareness
into why we're even on this little ball of mud called Earth.
So I'm excited too, and I think anyone that's struggling with it, just look what's
behind the behind.
Mm. Well, this challenge is a wonderful opportunity
for us to just pause, take a look at that, and maybe increase our
awareness
of that-
Mm
... so that we're in a position of choice.
Absolutely.
Blu Robinson, before I turn you loose back to your seat, anything
you wanna say about Addict to Athlete or call our attention to
what it is you're doing? Where can people connect with you, Blue?
Yeah. Absolutely. If you just jump on any website, you can jump on our website,
addicttoathlete.org. You'll find everything that we do right
there. We've opened chapters all over Utah, several outside of
Utah, one in, in New Zealand, which is kinda nice.
And so we're just kinda growing and helping people overcome addiction by,
by, like Dr. Paul says, erasing and replacing and turning messes into messages.
It's an amazing program, Blue, and I'm looking forward to coming and running with
you again soon.
Absolutely. We'll be out there.
Oh, fun. Awesome. Thank you, Blue.
My pleasure.
Thank you for gracing us with your presence here today.
I'm gonna go ahead and put you back in the audience seat, and-
Perfect
... you can take your hand or jump back in if there's a question that you wanna
respond to. Just let me know.
Sounds good. Thank you.
Thanks, Blue. Ah, you guys, I have some
amazing friends.Um, and there's more to come.
So we're going to be having a special guest join us every
day of the challenge. Um,
let's get to your questions, and I see yours in
the chat here, Rose. Let's take that one first.
I've got Yolande and, Nina have
submitted some in the Q&A. You guys put your questions in the Q&A
ideally. Um, you can put them in the chat as well.
Um, Rose says, "Dr. Paul, for those who are hearing this concept for the
first time, a question that often comes up is,
but what if
there truly is no good to be found in what's
happening?" Okay. Well, that's
interesting. I'll come to that. "Sometimes the
pain of a situation feels so overwhelming that the mind can't
see past it." Yeah. "The idea that anything
positive could come from it feels impossible, even
insensitive. How do you work through that
mental block, and how can someone begin to find hope or meaning
when a situation feels completely devoid of
good?" Um, Rose, thank you for that
question, and here's where I wanna go
with that. Okay? Th- this is one
of the assumptions
that I presented in the general session.
It is what it is,
and what it is is neutral.
Now,
pause there for a minute. Is it?
See, Rose, embedded in your question
is an assumption that, well, this thing is bad,
and there is no good in it.
Okay, so we need to question our assumption.
Is
what it is truly neutral?
And remember, neutral does not mean
painless or easy. It may be extremely
painful and difficult, and I'm still saying that it's
neutral, meaning
it could always be better by our own judgment,
it could always be worse.
And I think embedded also in your question, Rose, is
an acknowledgement that
I can't imagine anything
worse.
And notice we're not saying when we get into a positive
evaluation of what it is, we're not saying that it's
good. We're simply saying that it's better than
some alternative. All right? So let's
look at a couple of extreme examples.
Um, and for this one I've gotta grab a book off my shelf
because this comes to mind for me as an
example.
All right. This story, it's called My Story
by Elizabeth Smart,
and this is the only authorized version of her story.
You'll find other books about Elizabeth Smart, but guess what?
She didn't write them. She did this one.
What could possibly be good about this?
Now, if you're not familiar with Elizabeth, at the age of
14, she was abducted at
knifepoint from her bedroom in her
home in Salt Lake City. She was marched up a
hill at knifepoint by her captor, where she was
chained to a tree and then brutally abused in every way, I promise,
every way you can imagine
for nine months.
Okay. What could possibly be good about that?
What is there to be grateful for in that?
Rose, your question also brings up another issue that comes up all the
time. When we ask the question, what is there to be
grateful for in this, we
gotta watch our punctuation. Okay?
Because often... And
Devin just put in the chat it only lasted nine months.
I know, right?
She did survive, by the way. Okay, so suddenly
your position is changing. Notice we didn't change the circumstance.
We changed our position relative to the circumstance.
Elizabeth told me this when I was interviewing her for the
podcast. We did some work together, too, in creating a positive psychology
class for high schoolers. So
fun. And what a powerful woman this is, and she
shared with me
that when she was first abducted...
If you can imagine, okay, taken from the safest place
on the planet, her own bedroom in her parents'
home, as a 14-year-old girl, she's taken at knifepoint by
her captor from her bedroom. What the...
And she thought, "This is the worst thing that could ever happen.
There is nothing good in this." Right?
Th- just to speak to the energy of the
question.
And then
it got worse,
and she had a similar thought, "This is the worst thing that could ever happen to a
person."
And then it got
worse.
It kept getting worse.
Now, how is that...
Where are you going with this, Dr. Paul? This just got really dark.
Check this out. About two days in, I don't know what
specifically, but she had a realization.
The lights went on for Elizabeth, and she realized,
"Oh, it could always
be
worse."Right? It could always be worse
because, and I think this is what turned on the lights for her, that her
captor was making an attempt to kidnap also her
cousin.
And as much as Elizabeth would have appreciated some friendly company,
did she want that to happen to her cousin? No.
So this is better than that.
And suddenly she felt
gratitude. Why are we doing this
challenge, the twenty-five by challenge?
Gratitude is the fastest way to get there, and she felt gratitude, that
gratitude that it wasn't worse. It
is what it is, and that's
a package,
but it's not as bad as some other imagined scenarios and
so
it put her in a position of peace.
It didn't take away the pain. All right?
Still painful, still difficult. Yeah, that's true.
Well, compared to
less painful things or more difficult things
or less difficult things. See, we're always making the comparison.
That's the whole point.
So Rose, back to your question, you know, how do you work through that mental
block? You do it by taking on challenge number
one.
First and foremost, notice I am not inviting you to wimp
out and list all the easy stuff. I'm
saying do a workout, not a wimp
out. You pick something that is in
that category for you, something your brain has been telling you, "There is nothing
good about this. There is nothing that I can be grateful
for." And instead of saying, "Well, what is there to be grateful for
in this?" Hear the exclamation point?
It's not a question. It's a complaint
disguised as a question. It's a statement.
It's a declaration. It's not a question.
Turn it back into a question. This changes the
game. It doesn't necessarily change your
circumstance. It changes your
position, your attitude.
And when you come back tomorrow, we're gonna get into, okay, so how are we gonna
go create better things to come, because that gets really
exciting. All right? You with
me? Rose, I hope that answered your question.
You can respond if it did. Um, or if
it didn't, you can say, "Dr. Paul, come on.
Lean in a little more." Just put it back in the chat or in the Q&A.
Okay, let's go to Yolande's question.
"How's the weather there?"
It's unseasonably warm, and has been all winter.
Very little snowfall. Not even sure where you are
now, Yolande. Probably where you were, huh?
Um, yeah. The weather is what it
is, and it's warmer than
usual. There. Does that satisfy you?
Nina says, "How do you get
around the roadblocks in life through this model
in writing or work or
school?" And I think Jeffrey's in on that
question too.
Um, how do you get around the roadblocks?
You know what? Roadblocks are gonna happen, aren't they?
They are ab-- We're gonna run into roadblocks
all over the place. It's part of the
dealio. Um,
I'm gonna answer that the same way that I answered Rose earlier.
They're-- These challenge tasks are designed just for
that.
Back when I was stuck in the muck,
back when I was... It's in my book, Chapter One is Lightning
Strikes. Uh, when I was going through that bankruptcy and I was
stuck, I was trapped in this place.
Didn't even see that I had anything to do with the
stuckness. I was blaming my circumstances. I was blaming the insurance companies.
I was blaming the guys I invested with, my business partner, the
economy, the government, the weather.
I was, I was in this victim place, which we'll dive into more on
Wednesday.
I di-- I, I identified all these roadblocks, right?
Because when we point to what's in the
road, we're also blaming what's in the
road, that we can't move forward. After
all, look at the
roadblock. Anybody. "Look, not
my fault."
That's the problem. That's the trap.
Thinking that the roadblock
is actually a roadblock
rather than a challenge to be overcome.
Then y- what if we see a roadblock and we think, "Huh,
challenge accepted."
See, that's a whole different mentality, and again, we're gonna come back to this,
Nina and Jeffrey. We're gonna come back to this on
Wednesday, particularly, specifically.
Okay?
I hope that helps. All right,
Melanie.
How we doing in the chat? You guys have gone to the Q&A now.
Okay, got, Melanie's up next. "I've lost everything and
everyone with their choice to leave.
Years of loss that I ca- I can't get back.
Walking, a job, all friends, all money, all family.
How do I move forward by myself without these people and
abilities?"
Oh, and Melanie, you said you've met and listened to Elizabeth Smart
speak ten years ago. Yeah. How cool,
huh? Um, a-and she's a really good
example-Um, there are other great
examples
people who have lost everything.
Melanie, I don't know all of the details about
what's going on with you. Um, I've seen you show up in the
Facebook group, and we've had a few little
interactions. I don't know all the
details, but you know what? It doesn't matter.
I don't need to know
all of the details
because I already know that your
circumstance... Okay,
disclaimer, I get fired for this, but
I think we can talk, right? We're friends.
As your coach, it's my responsibility not to tell
you how to think, simply to invite you to see that
you are,
and then what you do with it is totally up to you.
So here's, here's the reminder. Your circumstances,
Melanie, your circumstances are right
here.
It is
what it is.
I invite you to notice that you're judging.
Evaluating is a nicer word. I mean, we're kind of judging people
in, in general as a species. But
notice that you're evaluating it, and in
your question is embedded your evaluation.
"I have lost everything and
everyone with their choice to leave." Is that
your circumstance? No, that's your judgment
of your circumstance.
Here's what I mean, and one of my coaches pointed this out to me.
Her name is Jodi Moore. She's brilliant, and she has
10X'd my life in so many ways. And
I was in a situation where I'd signed up for one of her coaching programs, and it
was on helping me to build this.
This, the whole reason that we're here this week, th- my
business model, sharing with more than five or six people
a day, 'cause that's what I used to do as a clinical
psychologist,
and now I'm serving thousands on YouTube and my podcast here in
this challenge. Um,
I was telling her what was going on in my business, okay?
And I thought I was telling her my
circumstance, and her response
changed everything for me. She said, as she listened, she
listened very empathically,
and she said this, "That's a
thought." And I'm like, "No, you're not
listening to me," right?
I'm telling you what's going on in my life.
No, I was telling her a story about
what's going on in my life. So Melanie, back to your
question, "I have lost everything." No, you
haven't. You picked everything as a word that
doesn't even close to represent what your circumstance
is. You lost everything? Okay. Now l-
look what your brain is doing. "Well, not everything,
but everything that was important." But really?
Everything that was important to you? And let's just challenge it.
What did you lose?
"I lost my house,
$15,000 in a bank account,
and my pet cat," or whatever,
okay? Gone. Those are the things that are...
that I did have and I don't have now.
Your circumstance would be an itemized list of what you
lost. "I lost everything" is a
story,
okay? Now,
oh, pardon me. I get excited, and then I wear out my voice before
I wear out my enthusiasm. You ever do that?
I'm simply inviting you to see it, all right?
Your circumstance is what it is, and what it is is, "I
lost or no longer have ownership of this, this, and that." And then you
said, "And everyone."
So we have to take a look at, okay,
who
used to be in your life but isn't now?
Um, a spouse? Children?
Who? Um, and, and you get to take
a look
at, at, at who... what your actual
circumstance is, okay? I lost this person, this person, and
that person, okay? That is your what it is,
and then see how you're evaluating it,
okay? And we're off to the races. All right.
How do I move forward by myself without these people and abilities?
You move forward with what it
is,
and tomorrow we're gonna talk about creating what is to be.
That doesn't exist yet. So start with today's challenge
task, Melanie, and that is going to catapult you
into a position that will powerfully create
what is to be. I look at what Elizabeth has created.
Oh my heavens. She has liberated thousands of
children from sex slavery. She has
inspired audiences, including you.
You were in one of her audiences. Would she have done all that had she
not lost everything and everyone?
Okay? Now I'm, I'm mixing up her story with your
story. It's our story with your details.
You're not an exception. All right.
Do you wanna fire me now? You can. I mean, I hope you don't.
All right. Let's go... And Natasha, you told me that we've
moved the questions into the Q&A. Awesome.
Okay. Cool beans.Um, Jen said,
"I've stopped commenting/complaining about gas
prices. It is what it is. I still choose to buy
gas so I can drive places." I know, right?
Um, Jen, this was so interesting years ago when the gas prices hit an
all-time high. Well, compared to what?
Compared to what they had been in the past.
Because when they hit that all-time high, I've seen higher
since, right? Um, you
don't have to buy gas. You can complain about gas
prices, or you can take a position
that this is better than walking.
And maybe it is, and maybe it isn't. And if it's not, then walk.
I trust you to choose well for you. Crystal, let's take a look at
yours. "Raised in a culture of toxic
positivity." I'm gonna define that, okay?
Because I've heard that term. "How do you hold space for the
pain while still choosing to look for the positive and
peace instead of just pretending the pain never happened?"
Thank you, Crystal. Thank you for this question
because
toxic positivity is
not positivity. I've
shared with you what positivity is.
Positivity as defined by the positivity
model, and I, I would challenge anybody who's
out there touting po- toxic positivity to show me a model
of how that works or helps. It
doesn't. And Crystal, you're onto it.
I think it is toxic and
poisonous. Those are the same thing, I guess.
Destructive. What other adjectives can we come
up with? To pretend
the pain isn't there.
Pain is a gift. I talk about this in my
book. Some children are born with a condition called congenital
analgesia, which basically means they don't
have the capability of experiencing
pain, and these kids are at
high risk for injury and
death.
So notice
that saying that pain is bad
denies our very
design, and I think it's a divine design.
I believe that, that our creator
knew what he was doing, did it on purpose, and
experiencing pain is part of what we're supposed to do as
humans. It is not positivity to
deny pain. In fact, I think it's closer to the truth that
we allow ourselves to feel
it.
And pain becomes part of what we're talking about
tomorrow because you don't get to go create anything unless you feel
some discontent, okay? That's a little
precursor for tomorrow.
Um, and, and you mentioned Crystal also being raised in a culture of
toxic positivity. I think culturally and traditionally,
sometimes it becomes just that. It becomes this very
toxic cultural, "Oh, just paste on a smile and pretend
everything's fine," and like the song says, "Don't cry
out loud.
Just keep it inside and learn how to hide your
feelings."
So bad. I mean, compared to
better things.
And the better thing is,
what if we were to feel all of our feelings?
Now, here's another thing that I'm gonna give you, Crystal.
Pain.
Uh, another thing I got from one of my coaches, and by the way, coaches need
coaches.
I just hired my next coach, spent a reassuringly
expensive amount of money to make sure that I take care of
this so that this can help take care of that.
I feel that responsibility to you, okay?
And one of my brilliant coaches
explained to me that there's two kinds of pain.
There is real pain. It's the kind that was designed by our creator
to help keep us safe and take care of our bodies and our
minds and our relationships. You're supposed to feel
pain when there's injury or something's out of alignment or
you need to pay attention to. It tells you what creation
projects you get to work on. Okay? So pain is not a bad thing.
Pain is a divine gift, and so is every other emotion that you could
possibly feel.
There's the real pain,
and there's the neurotic pain. Now, that caught my
attention 'cause as a professional psychologist, I see
the difference. And the real pain is the pain that you feel
as a human when you experience loss or injury.
Okay? Physical, emotional, it's all pain.
That's the real stuff. What do you do with that? Feel it.
Feel it.
And then there's the neurotic pain. Well, what is that?
That is the unnecessary pain that we
create by our
attitude.
That's this,
okay? You're not-- There's nothing wrong
with feeling pain. In fact, it is so right.
And if we nuke the pain, we nuke the pleasure.
There's a law of opposition. I keep this reminder on my desk.
It's a little 3D model of yin and yang.And it's
an ancient Taoist philosophy that there has to be an opposition
in all things. That for every dark, there's a light.
For every up, there's a down. For every in, there's an out.
There has to be and if we go about trying to
destroy
all so-called negative emotions, and I mean the painful, the
difficult ones, if we try to just nuke those,
we're gonna nuke all of them.
You can't get rid of the pain without getting rid of the pleasure, too.
And depression, clinical depression, is more
numbness than it is
sadness. You could get me
going on that, Crystal. Thank you for asking the question.
Does that help? I hope that helps.
Melanie, oh yeah, this is a follow-up, isn't it?
"I lost everyone, and then you said, 'I have my savior.'"
Ah. Oh, forgot to list that
one. I know, I'm playing with you a little bit, but
right?
And sometimes, you know what, it's spring, and as I get
out into my yard-- And Crystal, you said that was helpful. Awesome.
As I get out into my yard, and I start to do the pruning that's
necessary in the spring or when I was out there in the fall, I'm out there chopping
off branches
of my fruit trees, my grapevines, my
blackberries. I mean, I'm, I'm pruning. Right? I'm trimming it down.
And I wonder sometimes if the pain, and I guess
plants to the extent that they can feel pain probably
do when I'm chopping things
off. And I wonder if
our life experience, the universe, God, however you want to consider
your own creator relationship,
I wonder if we get pruned occasionally.
You know, like we've got a little extra something in there that is not
good for us, and somehow it gets pruned out.
I don't know. Maybe. It-it-- See, the, the error is to say, "This is
bad." No. Painful and bad are not the same
thing.
Painful and bad are not the same thing.
All right.
Let's go to... I'm trying to monitor the
chat and the Q&A. Let me go back up
here. In the chat, Carrie-Anne, "So this will take
moment-to-moment awareness every single day to allow us to identify what our
position is and what choice we have moving
forward. I'm someone who, I've
lied a lo-" Uh, let's see. "I'm so-
I am someone who have lied a lot in fight and
flight." Oh, I see what you're saying. You've, you've lied a lot in that area.
You've been in that space. Um, "So my reaction is often quicker
than my conscious choice." Yes. "How do I slow myself down
the best way when I struggle to find that pause?"
Carrie-Anne, short version, breathe.
Seriously, literally, it's a brain hack,
and I recommend that you breathe in through the nose nice and
deep,
stretch those lungs a little, and hold briefly, and then
release through the mouth nice and slow.
And you should take about twice as long on the exhale as you do on the inhale.
It's a brain hack. And in fact, if, if you want a little extra
challenge, practice this three to five reps, three times a day
for five days. And one rep is in through the nose, hold,
out through the mouth, mouth nice and slow.
Just do three to five of those three times a day
for five days. What you're doing is training your brain to start
reacting to your conscious command instead of
the chemical warfare that happens when we get into fight or
flight. I think we'll talk about that a little bit more on Wednesday as
well. That's a quick version.
Um, now I'm gonna go back and forth a little bit.
Rose in the Q&A, "Yes. Thank you for speaking to this.
I remembered this was such a struggle for me three to four years ago when I first
learned this concept." Yes. And it's not, it's not a
question necessarily, but your acknowledgement, Rose, of the
power of connecting in a metacognitive way.
Let's think about our thinking. Either your thoughts drive you
or
you drive your thoughts. Um, choose who's gonna be
driving. Jen says, "What do you do when the pain feels like
too much? Wishing and praying for death seems
like it would be better than living with the
pain." Yeah.
Um, what do you do? Well, first of all, too much
is not a circumstance. It's a
story. How much is too much? And usually, when we're
feeling pain, we're afraid that it's
not going to stop. Think about that.
We're afraid that it's not going to stop because in that moment it's like, "Okay,
well, I can handle this right now,
but if this doesn't stop, it's gonna drive me nuts." Right?
And then we start to project what would be better.
Well, death, because then it would stop.
You think. You guess. You
anticipate. You expect, but you don't know.
So notice it goes right back to the model, okay?
Um, notice that you're judging it as too
much.
Notice that, in that evaluation, you get
to choose your position. And I, I invite everybody to check in with
this too. Right now, right now in this
moment, being
present-Is powerful.
Present, right now, here now in this moment, do I have
enough?
The-- I mean for now, do I have enough money? Do I have enough air?
Do I have enough love? Do I have enough
freedom
right now?
See, anxiety
is about the future.
It, it's about, well, what if, right?
What if I don't in the future have enough? Like money.
I had a conversation with someone right here in this office.
I s-- They were going through an eviction, okay.
"Well, do you have enough money," right? "No, we don't." "Really?
For right now, I mean right now." "Well, right
now, I mean, we don't get evicted until Friday."
"Hmm. So right now you have enough?" What if you're being
evicted? You still have enough in that moment.
Th- and it's a weird concept, but in the present we're
good. In the future we're worried.
In the past we're depressed or feel shame,
guilt. So depression, shame, guilt, that's all past
based. Anxiety, fear, worry, that's all future
based. Now
we're good. Um, there's some
mental gymnastics to do there. How do you know you're making an impact in others'
lives? Again, from Jen. Um, you
are.
I'm just gonna state that, you are
making an impact in others' lives.
Now what kind of impact? Oh.
See, that changes. You can't, you can't not have an impact.
We are inextricably connected to each other.
We have to have an impact. And I'm going to get into the
influence quadrant I think on Thursday.
That's when we'll get to-- And Jen, you're familiar with that, but we're gonna
review that. Carrie. "Hi, Dr. Paul. This is great.
My son said you explain things very well." Oh, awesome.
Glad you're here, Carrie, by the way.
"When I asked him if he could find gratitude in a difficult situation, he got
defensive. How can I help him keep with this
challenge?" Um,
you guys, all of the challenges are optional.
It's only, it's only if you want
the promised outcomes. Peace in your mind and
heart,
confidence in your roles and relationships, and hope for better things to
come. Now,
that may or may not be your objective.
If you don't care about those things,
y-you don't have to do any challenge tasks.
And it's not our job to make sure that anybody does anything.
So Carrie, that's gonna trigger a couple of thought processes for you, I'm sure.
Um, but i-if, if we can just
acknowledge
that we are thinking. Again, I'm not here to tell you how to think.
I'm not saying you should feel grateful and
make peace with your past, make peace
with your circumstances, make peace with your what it is.
I'm not saying you should. I'm saying you can.
I'm inviting you to see your choice.
And it's convenient
and
easy.
Easy is pretty, pretty good word. We get addicted to easy. You know what?
It's easier
to go on ,
to go on with the story we've already
created.
It's easier to say, "No, my circumstances are,
are extraordinary." It's easier to say, "No, I'm a special case.
Look, it's not my fault." Hmm, and we get into victim
mode. And to step out of that
is hard
because we get to take responsibility.
And again, I'm gonna, postpone a little bit of this question for
Wednesday. Carrie, I'm so glad that you and your
son are connected here. Um,
and by the way, son, I didn't get the name there, but
you don't have to do the gratitude thing.
You don't have to. In fact, wimp out is easier than
work out. And I'm not saying that as a judgment, I'm saying
that as an observation. Wimp out is easier.
If you go to the gym and lift a pan,
easy-peasy. If you want easy, lift the
pan. If you want
results, do a workout, not a
wimp out. And it is not easy to ask your brain to
find what you're grateful for in a painful, difficult
circumstance. That's not easy. And I'm not saying it's
easy. If you want easy, I'm gonna have to refer you to one of my
colleagues. If you want what works, stick
around and lean in. Or not, it's up to
you. I don't know if you like that answer, Carrie.
Melanie's back. "I have lost all family
members." Okay. I can imagine that would
be possible
to lo- because you can identify who's in your...
It depends on how far out you go, you know.
Because I've been playing a little bit with family history and genetics and
DNA and
oh, man. I mean, the people you're related to.
Uh, and so it depends on how you define family, so I'd be
careful about, you know, any kind of blanket statements like
that and be very specific. "Here's the people that I lost.
Divorced 25 years ago. Son and grandsons, I haven't been able to
be a part of them." Yeah. Now we're getting more
specific. Now we're getting more specific, Melanie.
Nice work. Um, and I'm not saying that, you know, that's
good or that's bad. That's just your circumstance.
It's neutral. And I know people who would sign up
to be disconnected from their
families.Uh, I know
that sounds a little flip when I say it that way.
But yeah, I-- look, a-as a psychologist, I have
been doing this for three decades.
You can't shock me. Just
try. I have heard some of the darndest c**p you can
imagine, and I am convinced
that our circumstances are neutral.
And I had to go through a bankruptcy to prove it to me personally.
I knew it here, I didn't know it here yet.
That's why I shared some of that story with you.
Let's see.
Let's see here. And Melanie, you're asking, "Do you remember me?
Quiron Institute." Um, I'm wondering because you
said something about Weber State. I've never attended Weber State.
So I'm thinking we connected somewhere else, Melanie, and I'm
trying to remember where it was. We'll figure it out.
But I did not go to Weber State. I, I, did
my, undergraduate and my PhD at Brigham Young
University, BYU. Um, grew up in
Heber.
That might trigger something. I don't know. But I speak a lot too.
I'm a professional speaker, and I'm, I'm out
speaking as much as I can. Um,
all right. Carrie said his name's Christopher. He's not here right now. Yeah.
Awesome. I'm glad that you and Christopher are here.
And remember, it's a choice. It's a
choice. Uh, you're gonna notice something.
And I know a lot of people who showed up here in the VIP are also a part of
our Positivity Practitioner community.
We're gonna talk about that a little more on Thursday and Friday.
You guys are already exposed to this.
And there's different levels. So when we're first exposed to these
principles-- Rose, your question reminds me of this too.
It's, it's like brand new. It's like, wait, what? It's like, huh?
Oh, this is what? It's like learning a new
language, right? It all sounds foreign at first.
Hopefully, I've presented it in a way that at least like makes sense.
And Carrie, you mentioned this about your son, that I explained it
well, okay, but it's a foreign
language. It's not what I've been trained on and
educated. It's not in my programming. This is weird.
And the challenge task I gave you with twenty-five five and the gratitude power up
is weird, okay? It's a foreign language,
and your brain is used to the way that it's been
thinking
about all of this.
All right, you guys, I think we got through
the Q&A. Oh, Crystal, another quick one here. Another question.
"That kind of builds on my last question.
What happens when in a religious culture, not feeling is
equivalent to a sign of godliness?
So many have lost the pleasure and the pain.
How do we continue to feel and help others to learn and feel?" You know what?
You mentioned religion, but there, there are cultural attachments
within families and communities and traditions and
political parties and however we want to define
those, and I believe that there's a lot of false tradition
that gets touted around in the name of whatever the cause
is. I'm, I'm
inviting a higher level of cognition.
Metacognition. Let's think about our thinking.
Let's see if we can get to a place where-- and I have to do this
myself, by the way, Crystal, because I consider myself to be a man of faith,
and my religion and my faith are very important to me, and I came up
against some conflicts as I started to
learn about the things that I'm sharing with you here.
My dad helped me with this. He said, "You know, when the truth is all
in, there won't be a conflict
between religion, faith,
science. There won't be a conflict when the truth is all
in." And that has given me a little bit of peace in my own heart and mind,
and I'm on a quest now, a mission if you
will, to share these powerful principles of positive
psychology with as many people as I can.
And by the way, those of you who have been my referral
partners here, thank you. Thank you so much
because you have shared this challenge with people that I couldn't have reached
otherwise. And, I'll be addressing that a little later
in the week as well. All right, you guys.
We've done what we can do for today.
Um, you guys are amazing. Thank you for joining this VIP
experience. If you wanna encourage anybody else to come and join
us, please continue to share the
challenge. They can still jump in. They can still register.
You can invite them through the Facebook group if you want.
Let's get as many people as we can into that.
And I will see you all tomorrow. So honored to be on your
team. See you tomorrow. Bye-bye.